Data Model - 
It’s a way to model what database tables look like in a way that makes sense to humans. looking at data in tables isn’t ideal for humans. 
That’s where the data model comes in.
In Salesforce, we think about database tables as objects, we think about columns as fields, and rows as records.
When we talk about the data model, we’re talking about the collection of objects and fields in an app. two most common types of objects: standard and custom.
Standard objects are objects that are included with Salesforce. Common business objects like Account, Contact, Lead, and Opportunity are all standard objects.
Custom objects are objects that you create to store information that’s specific to your company or industry.

Field Types -

Identity 
A 15-character, case-sensitive field that’s automatically generated for every record. You can find a record’s ID in its URL.
System
Read-only fields that provide information about a record from the system, like when the record was created or when it was last changed.
Name
All records need names so you can distinguish between them. You can use text names or auto-numbered names that automatically increment every time you create a record.
Custom
Fields you create on standard or custom objects are called custom fields.

Identity, system, and name fields are standard on every object in Salesforce. 
Each standard object also comes with a set of prebuilt, standard fields. 
You can customize standard objects by adding custom fields, and you can add custom fields to your custom objects.


Every field has a data type. ex: Checkbox,Date or DateTime, Formula.

In the Field Name column, notice that it says Price__c. The “__c” part is an easy way to tell that a particular field is a custom field.




Object Relationships -
Object relationships are a special field type that connects two objects together. just like objects and fields, you can build custom relationships as well.
There are two main types of object relationships: lookup and master-detail.

Lookup
A lookup relationship essentially links two objects together so that you can “look up” one object from the related items on another object.
Lookup relationships can be one-to-one or one-to-many.
Typically, you use lookup relationships when objects are only related in some cases. Objects in lookup relationships usually work as stand-alone objects 
and have their own tabs in the user interface
 Hierarchical relationships are a special type of lookup relationship. The main difference between the two is that hierarchical relationships are only 
 available on the User object. You can use them for things like creating management chains between users.

Master-Detail 
master-detail relationships are a bit tighter. In this type of relationship, one object is the master and another is the detail. The master object 
controls certain behaviors of the detail object, like who can view the detail’s data.
In a master-detail relationship, the detail object doesn’t work as a stand-alone. It’s highly dependent on the master. In fact, if a record on 
the master object is deleted, all its related detail records are deleted as well. When you’re creating master-detail relationships, you always 
create the relationship field on the detail object.



Schema Builder -
Schema Builder is a tool that lets you visualize and edit your data model. It’s useful for designing and understanding complex data models.
Schema Builder is a handy tool for introducing your Salesforce customizations to a co-worker or explaining the way data flows throughout your system.
You can also create objects using Schema Builder. If you prefer, you can create objects in this visual interface if you’re designing your system and
want to be able to revise all your customizations on the spot


Import Data -

Salesforce offers two main methods for importing data.

Data Import Wizard
lets you import data in common standard objects, such as contacts, leads, accounts, as well as data in custom objects. 
It can import up to 50,000 records at a time.

Data Loader
import up to five million records at a time, of any data type, either from files or a database connection. 
It can be operated either through the user interface or the command line. 
In the latter case, you need to specify data sources, field mappings, and other parameters via configuration files. This makes it possible to automate 
the import process, using API calls.


Export Data -

Salesforce offers two main methods for exporting data.

Data Export Service
allows you to export data manually once every 7 days (for weekly export) or 29 days (for monthly export). 
You can also export data automatically at weekly or monthly intervals. 
Weekly exports are available in Enterprise, Performance, and Unlimited Editions. 
In Professional Edition and Developer Edition, you can generate backup files only every 29 days, or automatically at monthly intervals only.

Data Loader
a client application that you must install separately. It can be operated either through the user interface or the command line. 
The latter option is useful if you want to automate the export process, or use APIs to integrate with another system.



